## Methods {#methods}

### Metagenome Simulation

Thirty RefSeq genomes were selected using IslandPath-DIMOB [@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/bty095] GI prediction data collated into the IslandViewer database [www.pathogenomics.sfu.ca/islandviewer](www.pathogenomics.sfu.ca/islandviewer) [@doi:10.1093/nar/gkv401] (Supplemental Table 1).
The selected genomes and associated plasmids (listed in Supplemental Table 2 and deposited at osf.io/nrejs/ under "data/sequences") were manually selected to satisfy the following criteria: 10 genomes with 1-10 plasmids, 10 genomes with >10% of chromosomal DNA predicted to reside in GIs, and 10 genomes with <1% of chromosomal DNA predicted to reside in GIs.

In accordance with the recommendation in the CAMI challenge [@doi:10.1038/nmeth.4458] the genomes were randomly assigned a relative abundance following a log-normal distribution (μ = 1, σ = 2).
Plasmid copy number estimates could not be accurately found for all organisms. Therefore, plasmids were randomly assigned a copy number regime: low (1-20), medium (20-100), or high (500-1000) at a 2:1:1 rate.
Within each regime, the exact copy number was selected using an appropriately scaled gamma distribution (α = 4, β = 1) truncated to the regime range.

Finally, the effective plasmid relative abundance was determined by multiplying the plasmid copy number with the genome relative abundance.
The full set of randomly assigned relative abundances and copy numbers can be found in Supplemental Table 3.
Sequences were then concatenated into a single FASTA file with the appropriate relative abundance.
MiSeq v3 250 base pair (bp) paired-end reads with a mean fragment length of 1000bp (standard deviation of 50bp) were then simulated using art_illumina (v2016.06.05) [@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btr708] resulting in a simulated metagenome of 31,174,411 read pairs.
The selection of relative abundance and metagenome simulation itself was performed using the "data_simluation/simulate_metagenome.py" script.

### MAG Recovery

Reads were trimmed using sickle (v1.33) [@url:sickle] resulting in 25,682,644 surviving read pairs.
The trimmed reads were then assembled using 3 different metagenomic assemblers: metaSPAdes (v3.13.0) [@doi:10.1101/gr.213959.116], IDBA-UD (v1.1.3) [@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/bts174], and megahit (v1.1.3) [@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btv033]).
The resulting assemblies were summarised using metaQUAST (v5.0.2) [@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btv697].
The assemblies were then indexed and reads mapped back using Bowtie 2 (v2.3.4.3) [@doi:10.1038/nmeth.1923].

Samtools (v1.9) was used to sort the read mappings, and the read coverage was calculated using the MetaBAT2 accessory script (jgi\_summarize\_bam\_contig\_depths).
The three metagenome assemblies were then separately binned using MetaBAT2 (v2.13) [@doi:10.7287/peerj.preprints.27522v1], and MaxBin 2 (v2.2.6) [@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btv638]. 
MAGs were also recovered using CONCOCT (v0.4.2) [@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btw290] following the recommended protocol in the user manual.
Briefly, the supplied CONCOCT accessory scripts were used to cut contigs into 10 kilobase fragments (cut\_up\_fasta.py) and read coverage calculated for the fragments (CONCOCT\_coverage\_table.py).
These fragment coverages were then used to bin the 10kb fragments before the clustered fragments were merged (merge\_cutup\_clustering.py) to create the final CONCOCT MAG bins (extra\_fasta\_bins.py).
Finally, for each metagenome assembly the predicted bins from these three binners (Maxbin2, MetaBAT 2, and CONCOCT) were combined using the DAS Tool (v1.1.1) meta-binner [@doi:10.1038/s41564-018-0171-1].
This resulted in 12 separate sets of MAGs (one set for each assembler and binner pair).

### MAG assessment

#### Synthetic Read Coverage and Depth
The trimmed synthetic reads were mapped back to each reference replicon using bowtie2 (v2.4.1), and sorted and indexed using samtools (v1.10). 
The coverage of each reference replicon is calculated using `samtools coverage` and the per base sequencing depth calculated using `samtools depth`. 
The average and per base depth are then plotted using R (v.3.4.2). 

#### Chromosomal Coverage

The MAG assessment for chromosomal coverage was performed by creating a BLASTN 2.9.0+ [@doi:10.1186/1471-2105-10-421] database consisting of all the chromosomes of the input reference genomes.
Each MAG contig was then used as a query against this database and the coverage of the underlying chromosomes tallied by merging the overlapping aligning regions and summing the total length of aligned MAG contigs.
The most represented genome in each MAG was assigned as the “identity” of that MAG for further analyses.
Coverage values of less than 5% were filtered out and the number of different genomes that contigs from a given MAG aligned to were tallied.
Finally, the overall proportion of chromosomes that were not present in any MAG was tallied for each binner and assembler.

In order to investigate the impact of the presence of closely related genomes in the metagenome on the ability to bin chromosomes we generated a phylogenetic tree for all the input genomes.
Single copy universal bacterial proteins were identified in the reference genomes using BUSCO v4.0.2 with the Bacteria Odb10 data [@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btv351].
The 86 of these proteins that were found in every reference genome were concatenated and aligned using MAFFT v7.427 [@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/bty121] and masked with trimal v1.4.1-3 [@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btp348].
A maximum-likelihood phylogeny was then inferred with IQ-Tree v1.6.12 [@doi:10.1093/molbev/msu300] using 1000 ultrafast-bootstraps and the in-built ModelFinder determined partitioning [@doi:10.1093/molbev/mss020]. 
The phylogeny was then visualised using the interactive Tree of Life (iToL) v4 [@doi:10.1093/nar/gkz239].
Pairwise branch distances were extracted from the resulting tree using ETE3 v3.1.1 [@doi:10.1093/molbev/msw046] and regressed using a linear model against coverage (via seaborn v0.10.0 [@doi:10.5281/zenodo.3629446]) and using a poisson logistic regression model (via statsmodel v0.12.0 [@doi:10.25080/MAJORA-92BF1922-011] against contamination.  R^2 and McFadden's pseudo-R^2 were calculated for each model respectively using the statsmodel library.

#### Plasmid and GI Coverage

Plasmid and GI coverage were assessed in the same way.
Firstly, a BLASTN database was generated for each set of MAG contigs.
Then each MAG database was searched for plasmid and GI sequences with greater than 50% coverage.
All plasmids or GIs which could be found in the unbinned contigs or MAGs were recorded as having been successfully assembled.
The subset of these that were found in the binned MAGs was then separately tallied.
Finally, we evaluated the proportion of plasmids or GIs that were correctly assigned to the bin that was maximally composed of chromosomes from the same source genome.

### Antimicrobial Resistance and Virulence Factors Assessment

#### Detection of AMR/VF Genes

For the reference genomes, as well as 12 sets of MAGs, prodigal [@doi:10.1186/1471-2105-11-119] was used to predict open reading frames (ORFs) using the default parameters. 
AMR genes were predicted using Resistance Gene Identifier (RGI v5.0.0; default parameters) and the Comprehensive Antibiotic Resistance Database (CARD v3.0.3) [@doi:10.1093/nar/gkz935].
Virulence factors were predicted using the predicted ORFs and BLASTX 2.9.0+ [@doi:10.1186/1471-2105-10-421] against the Virulence Factor Database (VFDB; obtained on Aug 26, 2019) with an e-value cut-off of 0.001 and a minimum identity of 90% [@doi:10.1093/nar/gky1080].
Each MAG was then assigned to a reference chromosome using the above-mentioned mapping criteria for downstream analysis.

#### AMR/VF Gene Recovery

For each MAG set, we counted the total number of AMR/VF genes recovered in each metagenomic assembly and each MAG and compared this to the number predicted in their assigned reference chromosome and plasmids.
We then assessed the ability for MAGs to correctly bin AMR/VF genes of chromosomal, plasmid, and GI origin by mapping the location of the reference replicon’s predicted genes to the location of the same genes in the MAGs.
