## Results {#results}

### Recovery of Genomic Elements
#### Chromosomes 

The overall ability of MAG methods to recapitulate the original chromosomal source genomes varied widely.
We considered the "identity" of a given MAG bin to be that of the genome that comprises the largest proportion of sequence within that bin.
In other words if a bin is identifiably 70% species A and 30% species B we consider that to be a bin of species A.
Ideally, we wish to generate a single bin for each source genome consisting of the entire genome and no contigs from other genomes.
Some genomes are cleanly and accurately binned regardless of the assembler and binning method used (see Fig. @fig:speciescov).
Specifically, greater than 90% of _Streptomyces parvulus_ (minimum 91.8%) and _Clostridium baratii_ (minimum 96.4%) chromosomes are represented in individual bins across all methods.
However, no other genomes were consistently recovered at >30% chromosomal coverage across methods.
The three _Streptococcus_ genomes were particularly problematic with the best recovery for each ranging from 1.7% to 47.49%.
Contrary to what might be expected, the number of close relatives to a given genome in the metagenome did not clearly affect the MAG coverage (Fig. @fig:coverphylo).


![Top genome coverage for input genomes across MAG binners. Each dot represents the coverage of a specified genome when it comprised the plurality of the sequences in a bin. The binning tool is indicated by the colour of the dot as per the legend. Genomes such as _Clostridium baratti_ were accurately recovered across all binner-assembler combinations whereas genomes such as _Streptococcus macedonicus_ were systematically poorly recovered.](images/top_hits_per_bin.png){#fig:speciescov}

In terms of the impact of different metagenome assemblers, megahit resulted in the highest median chromosomal coverage across all binners (81.9%) with metaSPAdes performing worst (76.8%) (Fig. @fig:chromcoverpurity A).
In terms of binning tools, CONCOCT performed very poorly with a median 26% coverage for top hit per bin, followed by maxbin2 (83.1%), and MetaBAT2 (88.5%).
It is perhaps unsurprising that the best-performing binner in terms of bin top hit coverage was the metabinner DASTool that combines predictions from the other 3 binners (94.3% median top hit chromosome coverage per bin; (Fig. @fig:chromcoverpurity A)).

![Overall binning performance for every combination of metagenome assembler (as indicated by pane titles) and MAG binning tool (x-axis and legend colours). Diamonds in the plots represent outliers (greater or lower than the interquartile range marked by the error bars) and the boxes represent the lower quartile, median, and upper quartile respectively. **(A)** Chromosomal coverage of the most prevalent genome in each bin across binners and metagenome assemblies. Of the 3 assemblers, megahit resulted in the highest median chromosomal coverage (y-axis) across all binners (colored bars) at 81.9% with metaSPAdes performing the worst (76.8%). Of the 4 binners, CONCOCT (red) performed poorly with a median coverage, followed by maxbin2 (blue), MetaBAT2 (purple) and DASTool (green) performing the best. 
**(B)** Distribution of bin purity across assemblers and binners. The total number of genomes present in a bin at >5% coverage (y-axis) was largely equivalent across assemblers (x-axis). For the binning tools, maxbin2 (blue) produced nearly twice as many bins containing multiple species compared to CONCOCT (red), MetaBAT2 (purple) and DASTool (green), which all produced chimeric bins at roughly the same rate.](images/bin_cover_purity_combined.png){#fig:chromcoverpurity}

Bin purity, i.e. the number of genomes present in a bin at >5% coverage, was largely equivalent across assemblers, with a very marginally higher purity for IDBA.
Across binning tools maxbin2 proved an exception with nearly twice as many bins containing multiple species as the next binner (Fig. @fig:chromcoverpurity B).
The remaining binning tools were largely equivalent, producing chimeric bins at approximately the same rates.
Unlike coverage, purity was strongly affected by the number of close relatives in the metagenome to a given input genome. 
Specifically, the closer the nearest relative the less pure the bin (Fig. @fig:purityphylo).

#### Plasmids

Regardless of method, a very small proportion of plasmids were correctly grouped in the bin that was principally composed of chromosomal contigs from the same source genome.
Specifically, between 1.5% (IDBA-UD assembly with DASTool bins) and 29.2% (metaSPAdes with CONCOCT bins) were correctly binned at over 50% coverage.
In terms of metagenome assembly, metaSPAdes was by far the most successful assembler at assembling plasmids with 66.2% of plasmids identifiable at greater than 50% coverage.
IDBA-UD performed worst with 17.1% of plasmids recovered, and megahit recovered 36.9%.
If the plasmid was successfully assembled, it was, with one exception, placed in a MAG bin by maxbin2 and CONCOCT, although a much smaller fraction were correctly binned (typically less than 1/3rd).
Interestingly, the MetaBAT2 and DASTool binners were more conservative in assigning plasmid contigs to bins; of those assigned to bins, nearly all were correctly binned (Fig. @fig:plasmids).

![The performance of metagenomic assembly and binning to recover plasmid sequences. Each plot represents a different metagenome assembler, with the groups of bars along the x-axes showing the plasmid recovery performance of each binning tool when applied to the assemblies produced by that tool.  For each of these 12 assembler-binner-pair-produced MAGs the grouped bars from left to right show the percentage of plasmids assembled, assigned to any bin, and binned with the correct chromosomes.  These stages of the evaluation are indicated by the bar colours as per the legend.  Across all tools the assembly process resulted in the largest loss of plasmid sequences and only a small proportion of the assembled plasmids were correctly binned.](images/plasmid_recovery.png){#fig:plasmids}

#### Genomic Islands

GIs displayed a similar pattern of assembly and correct binning performance as plasmids (Fig. @fig:gis).
Assembly of GIs with >50% coverage was consistently poor (37.8-44.1%) with metaSPAdes outperforming the other two assembly approaches.
For the CONCOCT and maxbin2 binning tools, all GIs that were assembled were assigned to a bin, although the proportion of binned GIs that were correctly binned was lower than for DASTool and MetaBAT2.
DASTool, MetaBAT2 and CONCOCT did not display the same precipitous drop between those assembled and those correctly binned as was observed for plasmids.
In terms of overall correct binning with the chromosomes from the same genome the metaSPAdes assembly with CONCOCT (44.1%) and maxbin2 (43.3%) binners performed best.

![Impact of metagenomic assembly and MAG binning on recovery of genomic islands. GIs were recovered in a similarly poor fashion to plasmids. Generally, \<40% were correctly assigned to the same bin majorly comprised of chromosomal contigs from the same source genome regardless of binning (x-axis) and assembly (panel) methods at >50% coverage. metaSPAdes performed the best at assembling GIs (blue). Maxbin2 and CONCOCT placed GIs in a bin majority of the time (orange) however a very small fraction was correctly binned (green). Generally, GIs were correctly binned better than plasmids with DASTool, MetaBAT2 and CONCOCT.](images/GI_recovery.png){#fig:gis}

#### AMR Genes

The recovery of AMR genes in MAGs was poor with only ~49-55% of all AMR genes predicted in our reference genomes regardless of the assembly tool used, and metaSPAdes performing marginally better than other assemblers (Fig. @fig:AMRGenePercentRecoveryStageContext A).
Binning the contigs resulted in a ~1-15% loss in AMR gene recovery with the CONCOCT-metaSPAdes pair performing best at only 1% loss and DASTool-megahit performing the worst at 15% reduction of AMR genes recovered.
Overall, only 24% - 40% of all AMR genes were correctly binned.
This was lowest with the maxbin2-IDBA-UDA pair (24%) and highest in the CONCOCT-metaSPAdes pipe (40%).

![Recovery of AMR genes across assemblers, binners, and genomic context. **(A)** The proportion of reference AMR genes recovered (y-axis) was largely similar across assembly tools (panels as indicated by title) at roughly 50% with metaSPAdes performing marginally better overall. Binning tools (x-axis) resulted in a small reduction in AMR genes recovered (orange), however only 24-40% of all AMR genes were correctly binned (green). metaSPAdes-CONCOCT was the best performing MAG binning pipeline. **(B)** Percent of correctly binned AMR genes recovered by genomic context. MAG methods were best at recovering chromosomally located AMR genes (light blue) regardless of metagenomic assembler or binning tool used. Recovery of AMR genes in GIs showed a bigger variation between tools (light green). None of the 12 evaluated MAG recovery methods were able to recover plasmid located AMR genes (orange).](images/amr_recovery_combined.png){#fig:AMRGenePercentRecoveryStageContext}

Moreover, focusing on only the AMR genes that were correctly binned (Fig. @fig:AMRGenePercentRecoveryStageContext B) we can evaluate the impact of different genomic contexts (i.e. chromosomal, plasmid, GI).
Across all methods only 30%-53% of all chromosomally located AMR genes (n=120), 0-45% of GI located AMR genes (n=11) and none of the plasmid-localised AMR genes (n=20) were correctly binned.

#### Virulence Factor Genes

We also examined the impact of MAG approaches on recovery of virulence factor (VF) genes as identified using the Virulence Factor Database (VFDB).
We saw a similar trend as AMR genes (Fig. @fig:VFGenePercentRecoveryStageCombined A).
Between 56% and 64% of VFs were identifiable in the metagenomic assemblies (with megahit recovering the greatest proportion).
The binning process further reduced the number of recovered VFs by 4-26% with DASTool-megahit performing the worst (26%) and CONCOCT-metaSPAdes performing the best (4%).
Unlike AMR genes, the majority of VF genes assigned to a bin were assigned to the correct bin (i.e. that bin largely made up of contigs from the same input genome).
Overall, CONCOCT-metaSPAdes again performed best with 43% of all VFs correctly assigned.

![Recovery of VF genes across assemblers, binners, and genomic context. **(A)** Percent of reference virulence factor (VF) genes recovered across assemblers and binners. The proportion of reference VF genes recovered (y-axis) exhibited a similar trend as AMR genes. Recovery was greatest after the assembling stage (blue), with megahit performing best. Binning tools resulted in a larger reduction in VF genes recovered (orange) compared to AMR genes. However, in the majority of cases, VF genes that are binned are correctly binned (green). metaSPAdes-CONCOCT was again the best performing pair. **(B)** Percent of correctly binned VF genes recovered in each genomic region. Metagenome assembled genomes (MAGs) were again best at recovering chromosomally located VF genes (light blue), able to correctly bin majority of chromosomally located VFs. GIs recovered again performed very poorly (light green) and again none of the plasmid located AMR genes (orange) was correctly binned.](images/vf_recovery_combined.png){#fig:VFGenePercentRecoveryStageCombined}

As with AMR genes, the genomic context (chromosome, plasmid, GI) of a given VF largely determined how well it was binned (Fig. @fig:VFGenePercentRecoveryStageCombined B).
The majority (73%-98%) of all chromosomally located VF genes (n=757) were correctly binned.
However, 0-16% of GI-localised VF genes (n=809) and again none of the plasmid-associated VF genes (n=3) were recovered across all 12 MAG pipelines.

### Comparisons of Rates of Loss

We combined the performance metrics for Figs. @fig:plasmids, @fig:gis, @fig:AMRGenePercentRecoveryStageContext, and @fig:VFGenePercentRecoveryStageCombined to compare the rates of loss of different components (see Fig. @fig:rateofloss).
This highlighted that genomic components (GIs and plasmids) and plasmids in particular are lost at a disproportionately higher rate than individual gene types during MAG recovery.

