## Discussion {#discussion}

In this paper, we evaluated the ability of metagenome-assembled genome (MAG) binning methods to correctly recover mobile genetic elements (MGEs; i.e. GIs and plasmids) from metagenomic samples.
Overall, chromosomal sequences were binned well (up to 94.3% coverage, with perfect bin purity using megahit-DASTool) however closely related genomes were consistently cross-contaminated with other sequences (e.g. _Streptococcus_ species in Fig. [S1](#fig:coverphylo), [S2](#fig:purityphylo)).
Given the importance of MGEs in the function and spread of pathogenic traits, it is particularly noteworthy that regardless of MAG binning method, plasmids and GIs were disproportionately lost compared to core chromosomal regions. 
At best (with metaSPAdes and CONCOCT) 29.2% of plasmids and 44.1% of GIs were identifiable at >50% coverage in the correct bin (i.e. grouped with a bin that was mostly made up of contigs from the same genome). 
While some MGEs were likely recovered in more partial forms (<50% coverage), use of these by researchers interested in selective pressures and lateral gene transfer could lead to inaccurate inferences. 
This poor result is congruent with the intuition that the divergent compositional features and repetitive nature of these MGEs is problematic for MAG methods.
The particularly poor plasmid binning performance is likely attributable to the known difficulties in assembly of plasmids from short-read data [@doi:10.1099/mgen.0.000128].
Therefore, binning efficiency might improve with use of long-read sequencing or assembly methods optimised for recovering plasmids [@doi:10.1099/mgen.0.000128] (such as SCAPP [@doi:10.1101/2020.01.12.903252]).
Incorporating long-read sequencing has been shown to improve overall MAG binning [@doi:10.1101/2020.04.08.032540] and facilitate metagenomic characterisation of plasmids [@doi:10.1186/s40168-019-0737-z].
Further research is needed to fully characterise the performance of different long-read protocols on the accuracy of recovering MGEs in metagenomic samples.

Given the growing use of MAG methods in infectious disease research (e.g., [@doi:10.1099/mgen.0.000293;@doi:10.1016/j.envint.2019.05.036;@doi:10.1111/1462-2920.14989;@doi:10.3389/fmicb.2017.02036;@doi:10.1128/AEM.02577-16]) and the public-health importance of the LGT of AMR and VF genes, we also specifically evaluated the binning of these gene classes.
The majority of these genes were correctly assembled across assemblers but were either not assigned or incorrectly assigned to MAG bins during binning.
At best across all binners, 40% of all AMR genes and ~63% of VF genes (CONCOCT-metaSPAdes) present in the reference genomes were assigned to the correct MAG.
While a majority of chromosomally located VF genes (73-98%) and AMR genes (53%) were binned correctly, only 16% of GI VFs (n=809), 45% of GI AMR genes (n=11), and not a single plasmid associated VF (n=3) or AMR gene (n=20) were correctly binned.
This included critical high-threat MGE-associated AMR genes such as the KPC and OXA carbapenemases. 
One potential caveat of this is that some AMR genes and VFs may no longer be detectable in MAGs due to issues with ORF prediction (see suppl. discussion & Fig. [S3](#fig:geneContent)). 
Previous studies have observed that ORF predictions in draft genomes are more fragmented, which can lead to downstream over- or under-annotation with functional labels depending on the approach used [@doi:10.1186/1471-2164-13-14]. 

In general, there are 3 main limitations to this study that could direct future work: the drawbacks of metagenome simulation, the use of a single metagenome, and not evaluating the utility of multiple metagenomic replicates in recovery of these elements.
Metagenome simulation is unlikely to perfectly emulate all the noise and biases present in real metagenomic sequencing results. 
However, assessment with real metagenomic data is more problematic due to the lack of a known ground truth. 
This problem could be solved through the development of an MGE/AMR-focused mock metagenome in a similar manner as the mockrobiota initative [@doi:10.1128/mSystems.00062-16].
In the absence of this important resource, simulation represents the most powerful technique for evaluation of bioinformatic analyses. 
This is why simulation has been widely adopted in large-scale benchmarking experiments such as the CAMI challenges [@doi:10.1093/gigascience/giy069;@doi:10.1186/s40168-019-0633-6].
In terms of multiple technical replicates, while there are indications this approach may improve binning of MGEs [@doi:10.1126/sciadv.aax5727], most typical public-health and research MAG studies don't currently utilise this kind of approach (e.g., [@doi:10.1016/j.envint.2019.05.036;@doi:10.1111/1462-2920.14989]).
Finally, while future work should assess the impact of metagenome complexity and sequencing depth on MAG recovery of MGEs, a single simulated metagenome was used in this study to keep the binning performance of MGEs as clear as possible.
Given the importance of this issue, there was a pragmatic decision to use this relatively low-complexity (30 species) metagenome as a "best-case" evaluation, i.e., failure to recover elements for this dataset strongly suggests they would not be recovered in a more complex metagenome.
