
## Data availability

All datasets used or generated in this study are available at [osf.io/nrejs](osf.io/nrejs/)

## Code availability

All analysis and plotting code used is available at [github.com/fmaguire/MAG_gi_plasmid_analysis](github.com/fmaguire/MAG_gi_plasmid_analysis)

## Acknowledgements

This work was supported primarily by a Donald Hill Family Fellowship held by F.M.
W.Y.V.L. and B.J. hold Canadian Institute of Health Research (CIHR) doctoral scholarships.
K.G. was supported by a Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) Collaborative Research and Training Experience (CREATE) Bioinformatics scholarship.
B.J, W.Y.V.L., and K.G. also held Simon Fraser University (SFU) Omics and Data Sciences fellowships.
F.S.L.B. holds an SFU Distinguished Professorship and R.G.B. is a Professor and Associate Dean Research at Dalhousie University.
Additionally, this work was partially supported by Genome Canada and NSERC grants to R.G.B. and F.S.L.B. 

## Author Information

These authors contributed equally: Finlay Maguire & Baofeng Jia

### Affiliations

_Faculty of Computer Science, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada_

Finlay Maguire, & Robert G. Beiko

_Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, BC, Canada_

Baofeng Jia, Kristen Gray, Wing Yin Venus Lau, & Fiona S.L. Brinkman

### Contributions

F.M. and B.J. conceived and designed the study, performed MAG analyses, generated the figures, and wrote the manuscript.
W.Y.V.L. and K.G. provided key input on genomic island and subcellular localisation analyses, respectively.
All authors contributed to and approved the manuscript.

### Corresponding authors

Correspondence to Finlay Maguire or Fiona S.L. Brinkman

## Ethics declarations

The authors declare no competing interests.
