## Supplementals {#supplementals}

### Impact of Related Genomes on MAG

![Evaluation of impact of phylogenetic distance to closest neighbour input genome on genomic coverage in MAG majority comprised of that taxa. Each dot represents the genomic coverage of a particular taxa and the branch distance on an 86-protein concatenated phylogeny between that taxa and its nearest neighbour. Rows indicating the binning software and columns the metagenomic assembler. Regression line is a simple linear model fitted in seaborn. ](images/coverage_phylo_dist.png){#fig:coverphylo}

![Evaluation of impact of phylogenetic distance to closest neighbour input genome on bin purity.  Each dot shows the number of other input genomes detectable in a given MAG bin in relation to the branch distance on an 86-protein concatenated phylogeny between the majority taxa in that bin and its nearest neighbour.](images/purity_phylo_dist.png){#fig:purityphylo}

### Comparisons of Rates of Loss

Combining the performance metrics for Figs. @fig:plasmids, @fig:gis, @fig:AMRGenePercentRecoveryStage, and @fig:VFGenePercentRecoveryStage to compare the rates of loss of different components emphasises some of the observed patterns (see Fig. @fig:rateofloss).
This highlights that genomic components (GIs and plasmids) and plasmids in particular are lost at a higher rate than individual gene types during MAG recovery.

![Comparison of rates of loss for different genomic components and gene types across assemblers and binning tools. Each line represents a different component as indicated by the legend with assemblers indicated by row and binning tool by column. This shows that regardless of approach genomic components (GIs and plasmids) are lost at a higher rate than individual VF or AMR genes.](images/rate_of_loss.png){#fig:rateofloss}
